so this morning I will discuss a short
history of psychological torture a
reflection on the ethics of
psychological research it will be a
lecture with a prologue in four parts
each of the four parts describes a
distinctive phase in the half century
50-year history of CIA psychological
torture one discovery two propagation
three perfection and for legalization
first a prologue which I've titled
entering the covered netherworld working
as an academic historian for the past 35
years I have produced a half-dozen books
on seemingly diverse topics from the
global heroine traffic to Australian
organized crime now CIA torture better
all for a new interdisciplinary academic
field established by August at the
University of Melbourne law school in
Australia that examines what I call for
want of better words the covered
netherworld
this netherworld is an invisible
interest disk between the formal and
informal sectors of society where
criminal syndicates and clandestine
services collaborate in the exchange of
illicit goods and extra legal services
this is an uncommon but not I would
argue an inconsequential field for those
who wish to understand the complex world
that we live in since the end of the
Cold War as an index of scale of this
covered netherworld let us take its
largest commodity illicit drugs which
according to the UN's world drugs report
generates four hundred and eighty
billion dollars in revenues for 8% of
world trade larger than steel bottom of
meals or textiles in other words the
illicit drug traffic is now larger than
the legal trade for textile one of the
three essential food and shelter needed
to sustain human life as an index of
significance consider an obscure
CI interrogation doctrine called
psychological torture that has recently
emerged from the clandestine shadows
where it was concealed for over half a
century to dominate US domestic debate
over the war on terror and discredit
America's global leadership in the eyes
of the world despite its growing
significance as a force in shaping
modern life surprisingly few of my
fellow historians among the
thousands across the globe study this
covered netherworld
yet even with a modicum of skill
historical method I would argue can
prove a powerful tool for both scholars
and journalism bringing this vast still
unexplored terrain discover another one
through some coincidences at the cusp of
two careers journalism history I've
developed a method that merges the
historians use of documents for
long-term analysis with the journalist
reliance on first-person of these for
contemporary reportage when used
creatively the past can serve as a
powerful prism for illumination of an
otherwise opaque present highlighting
and historical continuity otherwise
concealed in a contemporary media player
by using this method we can discover the
secret history of psychological torture
that was hidden like a purloined letter
in Edgar Allan Poe's famed short story
write in plain sight on your desktops
not the carved wooden letter box as in
the love story but in the search
function on your desktop computer for
one discovery on April 28 2004 Americans
were stunned when CBS television
broadcast those now notorious
photographs from Iraq's Abu Ghraib
prison showing pretty rock he's stripped
naked while you miss soldiers - by
smiling that's the scandal grab
headlines around the globe defense
secretary Rumsfeld
insisted the abuses were perpetrated by
a small number of US military from the
conservative New York Times columnist
winged sapphire soon branded as
creeps when I looked at that most iconic
photo of a hooded Iraqi with fake
electrical wires hanging from the extend
arms I saw not the sadism of a few
creeps but instead the two key
trademarks of the CIA's psychological
torture paradigm the word was for
sensory disorientation the arms were
extended for self-inflicted pain it was
that simple while using the past to
interrogate the president I published a
book titled the question of torch him
last year the tracks the trail of an
extraordinary historical institutional
continuity through countless pages of
leaked and declassified documents I
found it from 1950
1962 the CIA led a secret research
effort to crack the code of human
consciousness a veritable Manhattan
Project of the mind with costs that
reach at peak in the late 1950s a
billion dollars a year now many if not
all of us have heard about the most
outlandish and least successful aspect
of this research the testing of LSD
collection subjects and the tragic death
of a CIA employee dr. Frank Olson who
jumped or as the son now believes was
pushed to his death from a New York
hotel and per dose of this drug this
Agency drug testing the focus of
countless sensational stories and
investigative reports that nowhere
except two lawsuits by the victims of
dr. Ewen Cameron sadistic experiments
and McGill's Allen Memorial Institute
lawsuits that still continue today forty
five years after these experiments ended
now in scientific terms this vasya
experiment yielded the sorts of negative
results that real scientific labs across
the world produced very quietly
countless times every day that's the
same negative results but obscure you
see I have funded behavioral experiments
outsourced to leading Canadian American
universities produce some key findings
all dueling and rather dull a reported
in scientific journals that contributed
to the discovery of a distinctively
American form of torture psychological
torture this behavioral approach was
given real impetus by a secret American
British Canadian research effort
launched in May 1951 when Sir Henry
Tizard the venerable senior scientists
from the UK Ministry of Defence
flew across the Atlantic and checked
into Montreal's ritz-carlton hotel
taking a single room with bath in 1940
Sir Henry had crossed the Atlantic to
forge cooperation from allied physicists
that made radar a key weapon in the
defeat of Nazi Germany and Imperial
Japan during World War two now 11 years
later and they can
Sir Henry was making the same voyage
across the same ocean to mobilize this
time not physicists but behavioral
scientists for the fight against the
Soviet Union during the Cold War in 1986
a Canadian government into an inquiry
headed by George Cooper
crusing reported quote a high-level
meeting took place at the Ritz problem
hotel in Montreal on June 1st 1951
attended by dr. Ullman Sawant head of
Canada's defense research board dr.
Donald ohem head of the board's
behavioral research and chair of
psychology at McGill University and to
Americans dr. Harold Hoskins and
commander RJ Williams who are identified
in a handwritten note later found in the
files of the defense research board as
CIA indicative of the extent of CIA
penetration but the u.s. scientific
establishment during this Bureau
director parallel Haskins became dis
five years later president of the
influential Carnegie Institution of
Washington DC a position he held until
1971 as noted the minutes of the
meetings taken by the defense Research
Board quote dr. hem suggested that an
approach based on upon the situation of
sensory isolation might lead to some
clues they're answering the central
problem which interested in fact has
grown discovered research coalition
confession meant aside intervention the
individual mind together with methods
concerned in psychological coercion end
quote
in response to dr. Hamza statement Sir
Henry - Henry Tizard state of these
issues quote have become a matter of
concern you pay and his advisers had
pointed out quote that methods of
psychological coercion have been well
developed by the Inquisition in framing
a research agenda to explore the
psychological coercion practice in the
Inquisition the Salem witch trials the
groom agreed that censoring and
isolation might plate subjects quote in
such a position psychologically that
they would be susceptible to the
implantation of new or different ideas
consequently the defense Research Board
gave dr. Kevin a confidential branding
for this research which discovered bio
1954 that quote mere isolation not
involved
any physical punishment might be a most
powerful instrument for affecting
fundamental changes in individual
beliefs hitting a continuing CIA contact
this work factor savant explain later
report has been appreciable interest to
us from certain C's representers of
which have by arrangement visited him
elaborating upon the meaning of this
so-called arrangement Cooper's report
explained that Washington and Ottawa had
agreed that if a Canadian scientists
such as have had work of interest in the
CIA he would do the work as directed by
the United States but he paid from pain
and funds by Ottawa thus making have a
de facto CIA researching well though the
Canadian quarry portrayed these
behavioral experiments as a desperate
search for defence against communist
brainwashing the CIA's own minutes of
the meeting made it clear that this was
not in fact the case as the discussions
open the principles according to CIA
minutes quickly agreed that there was no
conclusive evidence that the Soviets had
made anything akin to revolutionary
progress and dismissed their
interrogation techniques as full
remarkably similar to the age-old
methods behind closed doors there for
the defense of pretense for this pool
science evaporated and these cold waters
decided to pursue control over human
consciousness for its own sake agreeing
on joint research for their own
offensive Cold War operations a decision
I would argue that raises serious
questions about the sincerity of their
stated any communist motives and the
possibility of indeed darker darker
motivations within just a few years this
mind-control effort would include a
british intelligence research in in
sussex an anglo-american facility CIA
mi6 near frankfurt for fatal experiments
on captured Soviet bloc Expendables CIA
funded psychology research of any
universities
periodic allied conferences to exchange
results and above all falsified Canadian
Studies a sensory deprivation of media
University
indeed in 1951 52 the CIA coordinated
the US intelligence community in
developing a special top-secret
interrogation program to explore ways
that to quote a celeriac document
medieval medical science
particularly psychiatry and
psychotherapy has developed various
techniques by means of which some
external control can be imposed on the
mind or will of an individual such as
drugs hypnosis electric shocks and
neurosurgery with the aim of evaluating
the extent of threat to the national
security of the United States in
September of 1951 just three months
after this mantra lady dr. Henry Kavita
professor of anesthesiology at Harvard
University across the Atlantic to troll
European universities and the US
intelligence community in Europe for
collaborators and an exploration of the
efficacy of truth serum mescaline and
lsd-25 for interrogations remember the
name enrique Picchu they don't know it
already because we'll be coming back to
him at the conclusion of this talk well
though pursuit vigorously at CIA
headquarters and a half dozen university
research hospitals for decades all this
progress search was a dead end in the
CIA's search for new interrogation
methods among the hundreds of behavioral
experiments the CIA outsourced to
university researchers to produced
important discoveries with funding from
Canada's Defense Research Board the same
time Canadian psychologist dr. Donald
Hebb found through experiments conducted
from 1952 to 54 that they can induce a
state akin to psychosis in just 24 hours
what had the doctor done drugs hypnosis
electroshock remedy but for two days to
the volunteers at McGill University
where Hef was chair of psychology simply
sat in a comfortable cubicle deprived of
sensory stimulation by goggles gloves
and earmuffs
one of have subjects retired UC berkeley
professor peter Dale Scott Venter
undergraduate McGill University has
described these methods in his epic poem
listening to the panel
Peter Dale Scott was a subject in these
permits nothing in those weeks added up
yet the a very endlessness precondition
in my mind of sensory deprivation as a
volunteer in the mcgill experiment for
the US Air Force two CIA reps at the
meeting my ear sore from their earphones
amniotic from my eyes under two bulging
halves of ping-pong balls
arms covered to the tips with cardboard
tubes those for me
produce in Asians I was the first to
report as for example the string of
paper men emerging from a manhole in the
side of a snow-white Hill distinctly
two-dimensional for two days they paid
my mind to withdraw itself from every
impulse but its own to live only on
itself not seeing the objects as objects
the humour of the darkness and bothering
me assertion many of these student
subjects were named medical students at
McGill University and through Foley
interviews I've conducted with several
of these now elderly retired doctors I
have learned that one of their
classmates one of their sub the subjects
in these experiments also a medical
student suffered a complete breakdown
and had still not recovered a full 10
years when they lost touch with him
indeed Dora himself found that after
just two or three days of such isolation
for the subjects very identity had begun
to disintegrate
if you compare the drawings of Dr Hubbs
student volunteers with and photos of
today's Guantanamo detainees the
similarity is for good reasons striking
discovery number two self-inflicted pain
during the nineteen fifties as well to
enter ologists at Cornell University
Medical Center in New York City working
for the CIA found that the KGB's most
devastating torture techniques involved
not crew physical beatings but simply
forcing the victim to stand for days at
a time while the leg swelled the steam
erupted in separating nations the
kidneys shut down
hallucinations began all incredibly
painful again look at those hundreds of
photos from Abu Ghraib
you will see the repeated use of this
method which we now call stress
positions in 1863 the CIA distilled
these findings into its curiously named
cube art counterintelligence
interrogation manual which reveals one
read carefully the broad outlines of
that most persistent most problematic
the most distinctive the American form
of torture psychological torture if you
wish to read this manual for yourself
just know the word KUB AR k on your
desktop computer
and if you do focus on the footnotes
with their elaborate citation of
behavioral science experiments that
contain both the intellectual genealogy
and the perverse genius of the CIA's
psychological torture program if genius
is the discovery of the obvious then the
CIA's discovery of this psychological or
no-touch torture was a cover intuitive
breakthrough the first real revolution
the cruel science of pain and centuries
through more than 2,000 years of Western
judicial torture the same problem as
precipitant the strong defy pain before
the weak Portadown whatever was
necessary to stop it by contrast the CIA
psychological paradigm fused two new
methods sensory disorientation
self-inflicted pain whose combination in
theory theory would cause victims to
feel responsible for their own suffering
and thus perpetuate more readily to
their inquisitors years of practice
sensory disorientation relies on a mix
of sensory overload and sensory
deprivation by a vanilla procedures
isolation than intense interrogation
evening cold white dark noise and
silence and then all mixed up in various
spending for first ways but only the
experienced interrogator can really do
well for a systematic attack on all
who's been more in its clandestine
journey across continents and decades
this distinctively American form of
psychological torture would prove
elusive resilient adaptable powerful
destructive seductive and devastatingly
destructive me attributes that have
allowed it to persist in the present and
will allow it to continue into the
future but sort of review each attribute
in turn first very importantly elusive
unlike its physical barring
psychological torture lacks clear signs
of abuse and thus easily lose detection
greatly complicating any investigation
prosecution or attempt at prohibition
after British intelligence applied these
CIA techniques on IRA suspects in 1971
an inquiry headed by Lord Parker of
Washington found
psychological methods complicated a new
determination of torture where for war
crimes does hardship and discomfort end
and for instance humiliating treatment
begin and where does the lump of end and
torture begin the answer Lord Parker
said turns on words of definition and
thus opinions will inevitably different
no Lord markets Parker's prescient
phrase words of definitions definitions
are very important they're critical in
this whole exercise we're in Dublin suit
London all over this issue in 1977 the
European Court of Human Rights found
written guilty of inhuman and degrading
treatment but not not of torture alone
among the 17 justices that rule in this
case Judge Demetrius every Chinese of
Greece understood that there are new
forms of suffering that have little in
common with the physical pain caused by
conventional torture who some must have
caused extremely intense physical mental
and psychological suffering inevitably
covered by the strictest definition of
torture now that's not 2007 that's in
1877 that's a Greek justice from Moody
was talking about because of course the
Greek legal community had just finished
the famous Greek torture trials of the
Colonel's and their subalterns
who had subjected Bruce to this regime
motility perpetrators and their
protectors have a strong stake in
maintaining this elusive quality of
psychological torture by muddling
definitions of the practice just as
lieutenant general Kevin finally the US
Army Surgeon General did at the APA a
convention in August of last year when
he opposed successfully the APA and
making any definition of abuse asking
kind of mocking bullying manner how low
does a spring have to be how many angels
must dance on the head of a punish our
second point
Brazilian psychological torture is
shrouded in a scientific patina that
appeals to policymakers and avoid the
obvious physical brutality unpalatable
to the American public the third
attribute adaptable in the 40 years
since it discovered the agency's
psychological paradigm is
surprisingly adaptable with each
sustained application producing
innovations seductive for both the
perpetrators and the powerful who
command them torture has I suspect the
penalty certain a darkly erotic appeal
even when torture is initially intended
for a few Soviet spies or few top
al-qaeda commanders it soon spreads in
two directions rapid proliferation to
the torture of the many and our necks
herbal escalation in the scale of
brutality so seductive his tortures
appeal that the powerful will always
come [ __ ] rationale to preserve their
prerogative of torture in defiance of
all evidence of an effectiveness and
interrogation and enormous wing pie
protocol calls fifth and finally
destructive although seemingly less
brutal in physical methods
CIA's no-touch toward perfection these
searing psychological scores scars
victims often need long treatment to
recover from a trauma that many experts
at torture Center for treatment centers
across the United States consider more
crippling and physical pain
indeed just just this month doctor
Menton Basu blue a psychiatrist and
prominent specialist for portrait trauma
treatment at King's College London has
published a study in the archives of
general psychology finding from
interviews with 279 survivors from he
was Slavia that the mean distress rating
for physical and psychological or
non-physical stressors were in the same
range in part to propagation after
codification in the 1963 kubark manual
the CI spent the next 30 years
propagating these torture techniques
among anti-communist allies across Asia
and Latin America and although the
agency trained military interrogators
from across Latin America our knowledge
of the actual torture techniques
transmitted comes from a single handbook
for a Honduran training session the
CIA's human resources exploitation
1083 I can if you wish to read this
manual for yourself just go to your
laptop or desktop and google the phrase
human resources exploitation managing to
establish control at the outset the
question is should you see an instructor
tells his funding military trainees
quote manipulate the subjects
environment to create unpleasant or
intolerable situation to disrupt
patterns of time of space and sensory
perception psychological disruption this
1983 handbook specified techniques that
seemed strikingly similar to those
outlined 20 years earlier in the Q Park
manual and those that would be used 20
years later about the very prison when
the Cold War came up what was Washington
to resume that's out of the casino came
right ratifying the UN Convention
Against Torture 1994 to ban the
infliction of severe psychological and
physical pain now on the surface the
United States had by ratification of
this convention apparently resolve the
tension between its anti-torture
principles and his torture practices yet
when President Clinton was sent this UN
Convention to Congress for ratification
1994 included language drafted eight
years earlier by the Reagan
administration with for detailed
diplomatic paragraphs of reservation
focused on just one word in the 26
printed pages of the UN Convention that
word was mental significantly these
interpreting constructive diplomatic
reservations redefine torture as
interpreted by the United States to
exclude sensory deprivation and
self-inflicted pain the very techniques
the CIA had refined in such great cost
in decades past this definition was
reproduced a verbatim in domestic
legislation enacted to give legal force
to this UN Convention first in 20
section 23 40 of the US federal code and
then in the War Crimes Act of 1996
now remember that obscure number of
section 2314 or is the key to unlocking
the meaning of the controversial
Military Commissions law enacted by the
US Congress just last September a year
later in 1995 even
administration launched its covert
campaign against al-qaeda the CIA would
a direct involvement torture by sending
some 70 terrorist suspects the Allied
nations notorious or brutal physical
torture a practice called it's Ordinary
rendition which was supposedly banned by
the UN treaty in effect what washing
hands put the UN Convention down the
middle
banning physical torture but exempting
psychological abuse by failing to
repudiate the CIA's use of torture while
adopting a UN Convention that condemned
its practice the United States look at
this contradiction buried like a pod of
a landmine ready to detonate with such a
phenomenal force just ten years later in
the novel brave prison scandal part
three perfection right after his public
address to a shaken nation September 11
2001 President Bush gave his White House
staff wide secret orders saying quote I
don't care what the international
lawyers say we are going to kick some
ass in the months that followed
administration attorneys translated
their president's eloquent but otherwise
unlawful orders into US policy by three
neoconservative Leo doctrines one the
president is above the law to torture is
legally acceptable and three the US Navy
base at Guantanamo Bay is not US
territory the focus on the single doctor
most germane to psychological torture
that's just an attorney general Jay
Bybee found grounds and is now a
notorious August 2002 memo for
excavating any CIA interrogators with
tortured but later claimed his or her
intention was information instead of
pain
moreover by parsing UN and us
definitions of torture as severe
physical or mental pain by be included
in pain but went to organ failure was
legal effectively allowing torture up to
but not including death the Bush
administration began building a global
gulag for torture at Abu Ghraib Bagram
Bhutan MO and a half dozen additional
sites worldwide in February 2002 the
White House assured the CIA that the
administration's public pressure to
abide by the Geneva Conventions did not
apply to its operatives and the White
House also allowed the agency ten
enhanced interrogation methods designed
by agency psychologists including more
this technique which simulates drowning
was later called the totally sorry was
earlier called supporter like a lead guy
or Nadia or standard French torturer in
a 1541 French judicial handbook and it
would now become what CIA director
Porter Goss called in March 2005 a
professional interrogation technique
standard French torture 1541
2005 such as the pending human progress
on this topic there are several methods
for achieving this effect of the
simulation of drowning can be achieved
by several methods for example by
forcing the victim to lie prone and then
constricting breathing into what cloth
as was done by the French Inquisition
and the CIA to today or by forcing water
into the lungs as that was done by
French paratroopers during Algerian war
factor French paratroopers used this
technique on him during the battle for
out years in 1957 the journalist Corey a
leg wrote a new moving description of
his experience to turn the French people
against both torture and the Algerian
war I tried a leg road by constructing
my throat to take in as little water as
possible and to resist suffocation by
keeping air my lungs for as long as I
could but I couldn't hold on for more
than a few moments I've had the
impression of drowning and a terrible
agony that of death itself took
possession of me let us think about the
deeper meaning of a lake sparse words a
terrible agony that of death itself as
the water blocks air to the ones the
human organisms powerful mammalian
diving reflex kicks in and the brain is
wracked by horrific ly painful panic
signals death death death then the
victim vomits out the water balloons
suck in air the panics of science and
then it happens again and again and
again and again each time and screw
describing the searing trauma of
near-death and human memory and let us
think about the moral implications of
the recent refusal by the APA S pen's
task force to offer any specific
guidance about which techniques
including waterboarding might constitute
cruelty or torture
in late 2002 defense secretary Rumsfeld
appointed general Jeffrey Miller to
command Montano Moe why buy the tube for
interrogation making this prison into an
ad hoc Behavioral Science Laboratory
will be beyond the original attack on
sensory receptors Universal to all
humans that were the foundation of the
CIA's cycle out to the courts paradigm
Montana was interrogators stiffened the
psychological assault by exploring Arab
cultural sensitivity of sexuality gender
identity and fear of dog here we recall
of course the adaptable nature of the
paradigm these each extensive
application produces innovation his is
inhibition general Miller also formed
behavioral science consultation teams of
military psychologists will probe each
detainee from individual phobias such as
fear of dark or attachment Department
lieutenant general praline in his
celebratory article on the Hebrew
science consultation team said their
task was to find the buttons through
this total three-phase attack on sensory
receptors coats are generally from an
individual psyche want animal perfected
the CIA psychological paradigm
significantly after regular inspections
of gondwana from 2002 and 2004 the
International Red Cross reported and I
quote the construction of such a system
cannot be considered other than an
intentional system of cruel unusual and
degrading treatment and a form of
torture and a form of torture illustrate
these techniques let me now show a
two-minute segment from a recent
documentary film titled the road to
Guantanamo about the three British
Muslim detainees known as the Tipton's
three that recreation their perspective
the victims perspective their
interrogation the best single
representation I've seen other
techniques
the powerful cinema this depiction
cannot capture of course the full impact
of interrogation that continues for days
and weeks with worth a real interrogator
like some demonic DJ Altair an
alternating serpent denial of sensory
stimulus light the dark some in silence
heat then called all mixed and matched
to the victims persona to break down any
capacity for resistance these enhanced
interrogation policies by the way those
guys confessed they confess by God it
works they confess to participating they
were shown a video of 50 people in a
field in Afghanistan before 9/11
reverentially listening to Osama bin
Laden they confessed yes that's me after
the sea princess me that's me that's me
know anything of course mi5 food at one
time was evidence that they weren't
actually in the field there one guy was
on parole I was reporting weekly to a
magistrate in the UK another guy was
working in my electronics store me had
his timesheets from the store in London
so they lied is to stop it okay they
confess for being acolytes it was on bin
Laden these enhanced interrogation
policies originally use only against
talk about Reid operatives soon
proliferated to involve thousands of
ordinary Iraqis from Baghdad suffered a
wave of terror bombings in mid-2003 that
wants the resistance cos occupation
doctor visit from the Guantanamo chief
General Miller in September 2003 the US
commander for Iraq general Ricardo
Sanchez issued orders for sophisticated
psychological torture now as I read from
those orders please listen for the
defining components of psychologic
torture specifically sensory
disorientation self-inflicted pain and
that most recent innovation
attacks on Arab cultural sensitivities I
quote you environmental manipulation
altering the environment to create
moderate discomfort eg adjusting
temperatures of introducing unpleasant
smell the sleep adjustment adjusting the
sleeping cycles of the detainee eg
reversing the stinking cycles from night
today ex isolation isolated the detainee
from other detainees for 30 days why
presence of military working dogs
exploits Arab fear of dogs
while maintaining security during
interrogations a a yelling loud music
and light control used to create fear
disorient detainee and prolong capture
shock see see stress positions use a
physical posturing sitting standing
kneeling prone etc indeed my review of
the 1600 still classified our private
photos on the dis of the army Criminal
Investigation Command the photos taken
by the interrogators at Abu Ghraib
reveals not random idiosyncratic acts
from separate sadistic Minds but just
three portrait techniques repeated over
and over ad nauseam ad infinitum
reporting percentage deprivation short
travelling long shackling and and for
standing for self-inflicted pain and
total nudity sexual affiliation and dogs
for their recent innovation exploration
of our cultural sensitivity it is no
accident that private Linda England was
photographed leading an Iraqi detainee
lived like at all part for legalization
let's now look at the aftermath of the
Abu Ghraib scandal seeing how America
has moved by degrees to impunity for
perpetrators and to legalization of the
CIA psychological torture techniques
confronted by public a Negro detainee
abuse at Abu Ghraib the Bush White House
is fought back by defending torture as a
presidential prerogative by contrast an
ad hoc civil society coalition of courts
press and human rights groups has
mobilized to stop the abuse if you'll
indulge a personal remark watching for
example our military lawyers are
corporate lawyers the legal community
the psychotherapeutic community in part
the medical community many components of
American society mobilize in a time of
war to fight this abuse is an
extraordinary tribute to the strength
the ethics and the qualities of this
society so my critical remarks such as
they are or not
I think devoted to the whole of American
side of their focus for example in 2006
the American Psychiatric Association
band members were they are words that
are brilliant
surgically presents targeted at the key
facets of the CI paradigm they've and
their members from exposing subjects to
quote isolation imposition of fear
humiliation sensory deprivation or
excessive stimulation sleep deprivation
exploitation of phobias or prolonged
stress positions and you think of all
the thousands of things they could have
banned okay
this list of half a dozen is brilliantly
enumerated in order to hit the core of
the CIA psychological paradigm Nords
you've read those words and you then
think about my lecture and I have been
describing as those things and nothing
other than those things it's a superb
statement by the American Psychiatric
Association morally courageous
professionally informed and surgically
precise superb stated over the past 18
months this battle has been focused on
two key bills this pattern within
American society enacted by the
republican-controlled Congress the
detainee Treatment Act in 2005 and the
military commissions bill 2006 which
both core enacted to and in the gate
landmark of US Supreme Court decisions
let's look at the first of these bills
in the detainee Treatment icon the
Supreme Court decision that prompted it
in June 2004 the Supreme Court ruled in
a landmark case rasul v Bush that the
Guantanamo detainees were in fact on
American territory and thus deserve
access to US courts prompting the
country's top corporate law firms to
file a hundred and sixty habeas corpus
cases on behalf of 300 montano detainees
then in December of 2005 Senator John
McCain amended the must pass defense
appropriation bill with an absolute ban
on quote cruel inhumane and degrading
treatment of the Taney's order by the
military of the CIA the White House
fought back with loopholes first Vice
President Cheney pres McCain to simply
drop the law next national security
adviser Stephen have they urged legal
exemptions for CIA tortures and finally
the administration tried to neutralize
the impact of the Kings
with another amendment written by
Senator Lindsey Graham that tried to
deny the Guantanamo detainees any access
to the US ports for habeas corpus suits
then on December 15 2005 all these
tensions from the dissolve in that
dramatic Oval Office handshake between
Senator McCain and President Bush
President Bush announced that this
landmark legislation made it clear to
the world that this government is not
torture that media Mirage concealed
continue White House moves to undercut
the same legislation using it to
legitimate the three controversial legal
doctrines the neoconservative doctrine
legal doctrines that the White House
lawyers have devised to justify torture
after 9/11 dr. Warren of course is the
president above the law doctor to of
course is there a legal loophole on the
CR to torture illegally and dr. three
doctor three most important in this
context the US Navy base at Guantanamo
was not US territory to nullify the
Supreme Court's 2004 ruling in Russell V
bush this new law as amended by Senator
Graham stipulated that Montano MoBay is
no longer US territory and in theorem in
theory denied detainees any access to US
courts in effect McCain's original
amendment ban torture but Senator
Graham's amendment to that amendment
removed any real mechanism for the
enforcement of this bang if you look
behind the headlines surrounding this
debate for a deeper analysis it seems
that the elusive quality of
psychological torture that are cited
writing instruction as complicated
Congress's recent efforts to break the
promise
now unlike conventional torture as I
said earlier with its telltale
principles Afellay psychological abuse
eludes easy definition and as I said
definitions are critical in both
perpetration and prevention indeed right
after Congress approved McCain's torture
ban last in December of 2005 attorney
general Alberto Gonzales parse the words
severe to insist that the new law only
adds purification papyruses existing
definition of torture as these are
Gonzalez's were intentional severe
physical or mental pain the Attorney
General seem to be arguing the opinions
of
Department subordinates who are already
arguing off-the-record and in the press
that the torture ban by McCain would
still allow waterboarding the same
method that the French Inquisition and
once called Authority gulika ordinarily
I'm or standard French torturing when
future investigators try to judge the
school took great signs of CIA
psychological torture each of the
Attorney General's words intentional
severe and mental or open another
loophole
Heather honor of the needle through
which the CIA can pass to continue this
cruel practice in a dramatic day in the
month of June 2006 the US Supreme Court
decided in a second landmark decision
and M V Rumsfeld the President Bush's
military commissions were illegal
because they did not meet the
requirement under common article 3
others even convention that wanna mount
detainees be tried and these are the
words of the court with all the judicial
guarantees recognized as indispensable
by civilized people then on September 6
of last year on a dramatic bid to
legalize is now illegal policies but a
virtual of the Supreme Court decision
President Bush announced that he was
transferring fourteen top al-qaeda
captives from secret CIA prisons to
Guantanamo Bay and was 4pd aiding and
legitimating past abuses President Bush
denied either authorized torture while
simultaneously defending the CIA's use
of a tough alternative set of procedures
to extract what he called a vital
information well now where push called
the CIA program to go forward President
Bush announced he was sending
legislation to commerce that would
legalize the same presidential
priorities in treatment of detainees
that have been challenged by this front
for our first was a bill seemed to
arouse strong opposition by three
Republican veterans on the Senate Armed
Forces the fourth was Armed Services
Committee senators Graham McCain and
Warner but after tense day long
negotiations inside vice president
Cheney's Senate office on September 21st
2006 these Republican partisans reached
a compromise that sailed through
Congress within a week without an
amendment to become the military
commissions walk 2006 know among its
many objectionable features this law
scripts detainees of their hideous
corpus rights sanctions analyst
without trial and allows the use of
tortured testimony before the military
commissions most significantly in terms
of this talk by using verbatim the
narrow definition can keep coming back
to that word definition definition of
severe mental pain at the United States
burst of doctor back in 1994 this will
allow the I interrogators ample latitude
for future psychological torture this
definition is concealed under paragraph
nine fifty V Part B subsection B on page
seventy of this dense ninety six page
law that reads quote severe mental pain
or suffering defined in this section
this term severe mental pain has the
meaning given that term in section 2314
of Title 18 of the federal code now what
is that definition in section 23 forty
which we serve for assault back in 1994
this is of course the same restrictive
definition of psychological torture the
United States first adopted when
ratified the Ormandy toward convention
1994 and enacted enabling legislation is
federal law cific for this legislations
highly limited standard for severe
mental suffering does not prohibit any
aspect of the sophisticated torture
techniques the CIA is refined over the
past half-century into a total
psychological assault on the human
psyche to make my point clear let us
compare the laws a very narrow four-part
standard for severe mental suffering
with the CIA's actual practice of
psychological torture to see which if
any of the agency's techniques are
banned under the new law now under this
law section twenty to forty there are
only four practices that constitute in
any way severe mental pain in other
words what severe mental pain I'll pay
it it's these four things and nothing
else
okay four things okay what are them drug
injection death threats threats against
another and extreme physical pain in
actual practice this definition does not
ban any of the
CIA and now military intelligence
psychological methods developed over the
past five decades which I detailed in
this talk but let me just recapitulate
your very briefly this will get an idea
of what's not included first talk with
the pain biron for standing a so-called
stress positions which are cruel
contortions enforced by sharpen those we
saw in video ii sensory disorientation
from temple and environmental
manipulation exemplified by sleep
deprivation protracted isolation and
extremes of heat we call light and dark
noise and silent isolation and intensive
interrogation third attacks on coach
identity through sexual Millie a Shanice
of dollars for attacks on individual
psyche by exploiting fears and bogies v
hybrid methods such as Porter board and
six and most importantly creative
combination of all these methods which
might seem individually banal if not
benign you wish analogy to make the
curious the Alice in Wonderland
curiouser and curiouser logic of this
legislation perfectly clear would be as
if us homicide law had taken leave from
the popular board game Clue given my
audience I must ask does everybody here
know clerk at that makes I assume and
like most of us you know we kind of tend
to miss things out there ordinary
culture look it's really I guess it's a
board game it could be played safe at
home between working on our footnotes
this the US homicide law have taken this
leap from the board game Clue and
defined murder as only those killings
done by this is white in the
conservatory a candlestick thereby
legalizing all murders done by more
conventional means that took poison
pistols rifles knives Rotary clubs or
bombs to test my critical one might even
say overly critical assessment
let us ask whether in this new law bans
the most extreme of the CIA's enhanced
methods
water board while the White House is
refused comment Vice President Cheney
stated last October that using a dunk in
water to extract information was quote a
no-brainer for me administration's
leader on interrogation policy Vice
President Cheney words make clear and
despite White House denials that
waterboarding is legal under the new law
by its omissions this legislation the
Military Commission Act 2006 has
effectively legalized the CIA's right
these methods that internationally the
international community and bought it in
the Red Cross and the UN Human Rights
Committee considers psychological
torture for the first time in the 200
years since 1791 with the United States
ratified the fifth amendment banning
self-incrimination why do we ban
self-incrimination why would anybody in
the 18th century self-incriminate water
need to be banned because if you were
tortured you would self-incriminating
so the balance of elimination was not in
fact invented so that Tony Soprano or
his real-life equivalents could stand up
for the US Congress or US courts and say
I think the minute no it was introduced
to ban torture from the US judicial
process that's the point of the third
amendment the implications of the
military commission for of us profound
and they are facing legal challenge but
we're in this case which is the Supreme
Court we cannot expect that the Roberts
Court will overturn this with the same
ring Rainier ever and we saw in those
two recent landmark decisions are slowly
abortion Honda V Rumsfeld
if this law stands with its provisions
for torture and drug head justice in the
United States will suffer continued
damage to its moral leadership in the
international community looking through
a glass darkly into the future
Washington may return to that convenient
Cold War contradiction public compliance
of human rights treaties and secret
torture and conquer
of those same international convention
okay yet the world is no longer blind to
these ones clandestine CIA methods and
this attempt at secrecy will likely
produce another scandal similar to
Hubble beret and next time our part
stations of of innocents will ring
hollow and the damage to US prestige the
damage to this great nations moral
leadership will be even greater than the
last time
let me now conclude with some ethical
reflections if I were asked to stand
back from our current debate over
torture and draw some brawlers I could
technically because I'm no expert on
this but you're asked me so I'll answer
you invited me so here I am I would
argue that the past has lessons for our
present let us return to that figure of
Henry dr. Henry K Beecher only last saw
as we will call of traveling through
Europe in 1951 trying to recruit
European scientists and US military
officers the CIA is massive mind control
project why does everyone here today
need every academic researcher in
America live in dr. Becher shadow mr.
bang key can you tell us who Henry K
beatriz and why we live in a shadow you
know did you know if you were to be true
what's your what's your type of APN I
have epic sawsan why does the APA have
an ethics office
Henry KB trip okay why is that human
subjects protocol why are there
institutional review boards why do we
have informed consent for some things
Henry can be true the date dr. beter is
remembered for his fame 1966 article
ethics and clinical research for the New
England Journal of Medicine which cited
22 incidences of morally dubious medical
research conducted without regard for
the welfare of human subjects dr. Vetra
warned that we were at risk for this
abuse of the subjects becoming universal
in practice of clinical research four
years later feature expand upon these
ideas in his book research in the
individual growing upon the cautionary
example of the Nazi doctors tried at
Nuremberg to argue hope and medicine the
first rule is to do no harm
if serious risk is to be taken however
this can often be limited the situation
where the subject a patient promises to
profit directly from him when serious
versus to be taken for the sake of
science alone the welfare of the subject
is paramount
end quote from page 181 of his father
initially controversial and it was
enormously controversial at the time
Beecher study Nietzsche's accusations
once the establishment of institutional
review boards and made his name
synonymous with informed consent and the
ethical treatment of human suffers a
legacy commemorated with the annual
award of the Henry K Beecher prize in
medical ethics at Harvard Medical School
given to the student who writes the best
essay in medical ethics
he's an exemplar for the future doctors
and clinical researchers of America
typical of the laudatory treatment of
Beatrice career a 2001 article in The
Bulletin of the World Health
Organization explained that leaches
quote deep Christian faith and some
guilt over ethical lapses in his lab
perhaps
claritin to sound the warning that
breaches of ethical conduct are almost
universal and medical research
now throughout his moral per se because
he was citing these examples of abusive
treatment dr. Becher did not tell us
about his secret work for the US
intelligence community from 1947 to 1950
to approximately may have started
earlier and it made her run later but
those teammates would know about in
September 1951 just three months after
that seminal Montreal meeting with Henry
Tizard and dr. hem and CIA
representative Carol Hoffman is dr.
Henry K Beecher the Dora professor of
anesthesiology at Harvard Medical School
cross the Atlantic in the opposite
direction travelling through England and
Germany to mobilise European scientists
and u.s. intelligence officers an
exploration of the efficacy of truth
serum mescaline and lsd-25 for
interrogation so obsessed was Beecher
with advancing the use of drugs from
interrogation they hid earlier obtain
copies of dr. Kirk Partners notorious
reports of mescaline testing for the
Gestapo at the Dachau death camp indeed
if you've got a doc out today and you
look at the copies of dr. Partners
reports those are actually from features
files he has the only FDA only have
certain copies of by the partners
reports let's review professor Beecher
detailed 15 page report to the US Army
Surgeon General of his 1951 European
tour by the way the US Army Surgeon
General that's lieutenant Kevin Pilate
today Charlie's predecessor
now according to the report in England
Beach was first stop in 1951
involved specials of senior medical
researchers at Oxford and Cambridge
about the utility of - some mescaline
and LSD to learn a quote there's special
value if many men are to be interrogated
end quote moving on to shape later in
NATO headquarters at Marlin roll-off
Beecher had conversations about drugs
and security with senior US Army
officers of whom teacher said and I
quote they also expressed the view that
since our work is supported by the
medical research and development board
but the proper channel for its extension
to useful levels was for the Joint
Intelligence Committee rather than the
Central Intelligence
agency since the Central Intelligence
Agency has representatives in any case
on the Joint Intelligence Committee at
Heidelberg chief US Surgeon for Europe
John denna told Peter Pope that as a
physician under the Geneva Convention he
did it but have nothing to do with the
use of drugs for the purposes of mine
and turn me over to g2 as army
intelligence well that's been the u.s.
army G to arrange feature to move into
the heart of the interrogation effort at
over whistle to the European Command
interrogation Center of the US Army
where conversations the six top military
and civil researchers concluded it's a
picture that quote it would be desirable
for me to return perhaps in a year when
we know better the signs and symptoms of
the newer derivatives of mescaline and
lysergic acid to interrogate especially
high-level escapees from Russian
delegation also the staff recommended
the beecher worked with more general
Schreiber whom Beecher described as a
physician and former german general who
is now on his way to the united states
and will be at the school of aviation
medicine Randolph field they thought
Schreiber would be a good man for me to
see and to interrogate Schreiber is
intelligent and helpful so who is
Schreiber features Peter tip research
partner well this was of course ex-nazi
general Walter Schreiber former
commander of the Vermont Medical Corps
and Nazi doctor who conduct experiments
on concentration camp prisoners during
the war and been employed at over
Barrasso before the CIA brought him to
the United States under Operation
Paperclip
albeit only until May 1952 when press
expose of his Nuremberg testimony about
his war crimes force the CIA exfiltrated
to Argentina significantly over Warsaw
was located in the Thomas hills outside
Frankfurt and it was the site of the US
Army's Camp King were former Nazi
scientists the Nazi doctors including
the notorious deputy right health leader
in Bronco dr. Kurt Blome were employed
in powa interrogation including fagelah
experiments on these so-called
Expendables a year later in August 1952
feature did return to Europe where after
conversation with Armijo
there's about lsd-25 he recommended
strongly the study of quote of these
agents as offensive weapons in for
example sitting water supplies reporting
to Washington the implications of his
own LSD experiments now listen carefully
in btris description of his own research
to see if one of his priorities is
concerned the subjects okay we need to
know for example the ordinary
chlorination of the water will oxidize
lysergic acid derivatives in the doses
we have been using the maximum effect is
obtained in about two hours after
ingestion by mouth and the duration of
the effectiveness is about six hours we
need to know the effects of larger doses
a prolonged administration of small
doses and so on these agents are being
studied by some 200 investigators on
both sides of the Iron Curtain fight
earnestly hope the United States will
not get behind in this field from one of
an organized plan of attempt with
features access to these secret
interrogation facilities and is deep
implication in this research you must
wonder about his role in the
proliferating LSD experiments at Harvard
so Cavalier and their treatment of human
subjects and more seriously if you
participated in or learned about the
CIA's terminal experiments on so-called
Expendables human subjects were tortured
Camp King and Omarosa landed nearby CIA
safe house during this 1951-52 period
therefore features only count indicates
that he had planned eggs from
experimentation for interrogation with
the US intelligence community tried to
implicate reputable British scientists
in possible criminal research proposed
drug testing that a senior US Army
Surgeon considered criminal visited the
site of in remain and sometimes
murderous interrogation experiments at
oberursel
eagerly sought out Nazi doctors and the
fruits of their notorious Dachau
experiments and back home at Harvard
practice LSD tests in heavy doses
without concern for the human subjects
so what lesson like we draw from the
career of Henry Clay Beecher
other than the importance of dying
before your secret reports are
Declassified
[Music]
betray and change from being the cia's
meet Elysee and the heir to the Nazi
doctors drug research into an ethical
Paragon for all American academics that
any professional group can change if
members of the APA feel tainted by the
work of their colleagues at Guantanamo
and the ambiguous report of their
professional association over these
ethical lapses then Beecher provides a
shining time to ethical reform just as
interchange from 8 what I call a
neo-nazi doctor to moral Paragon by
embracing ethical standards so the APA
can change from a protector of Bush's
psychological tortures by using its
professional skills to define severe
pain and psychological abuse and a
revised Penn's report an ethical
standard or above all and I would argue
that this is a responsibility of all the
psychotherapy professionals provides the
definition of these issues particularly
severe mental pain in a robust DSM for
the International Red Cross has been
there
unlike the representative the American
Psychological Association they've
actually been in the cellblocks on the
ground no we don't know the full extent
of their access but it's the most
unrestricted of any group in other words
they know more than anybody other than
the military itself and they have
reviewed very carefully this is the
International Red Cross the
extraordinary legalistic there who's
very meticulous in their work and this
was a confidential report that leaks
somehow they found the case techniques
with torture ok so there's an informed
room fully mindful of the international
conventions that as reported in this is
torture
all right so let's just make that
assumption okay let's assume that in
fact US interrogators at Guantanamo have
been engaged in the practice of torture
all right
so the question is what are we gonna do
about well lieutenant general Crowley is
telling the American Psychological
section don't do anything don't define
them above all don't define alright
that's my way of thinking is above all
let's define so why do we need to find
well first of all as we saw in the
notorious August 2004 memo when the
Justice Department Bush administration
ones a lot of the Senior Tour so what
they do they tampered with the legal
definitions they came up with this
absurd definition of severe pain as
being tantamount to organ failure and
they derive that not from relevant
legislation on torture human rights
abuse they got it from obscure Medicare
reading regulations
okay so what I'm saying is that those
who are the practitioners are enabling
those of those who are enabling the
perpetrators are either getting informed
groups to back off on definitions or
using definitional military demand in
order to allow the publishers so
definitions are critical so the first
thing I would say is the only thing I
will say to any professional barber that
has expertise that I do not even begin
to have and I'm going to say that I
don't know anything about this I just
doesn't strainers I'll line it up line
up the paperwork
okay and I have a certain purchase on
yes I work on kind of operations but
again historians are journalists what
works okay all I'm gonna say is words
you don't need a definition okay you
need to define it that's your job is to
define it to draw upon your expertise
what I'm also saying is that from my way
of thinking
I find it stunning absolutely stunning
but the American Psychiatric Association
in - and in 2006 okay no months after my
book was written can actually come up
with a definition of the things that
members not do which is a no it's a
palimpsest of my book okay I mean you
know they're dovetail perfectly
things that they prescribed are the
techniques that I found historically
been using historical myths operating
that the key techniques and the it's
well if it's the precision again again
if you look at Basu blows article I in
archives of General Psychiatry publishes
month in which he lists the physical and
the psychological techniques
I think he's got at the top man I bet
they know but forgive me if I'd gotten
wrong he's got something like seventy
techniques okay if you look at that
American Psychiatric Association that
they don't list seventy things you can't
do they missed six and they get them
right from my perspective so I can say
is that from my historical work from
what I found are the core principles the
key techniques that as far as I can tell
to find this paradigm in my view the
American Psychiatric Association got it
a hundred percent correct
okay now the paradigm is gonna change as
I said every extent application produced
an innovation and they may have to amend
their words but for the time being
okay they've got it right I think and so
you start from there
that's all I can say and how you go from
there that's your business because this
is not my field and therefore I have to
always work from my text wise I make
errors of fact on transportation says
they prohibit their practitioners from
exposing subjects to quote isolation
imposition of fear humiliation sensory
deprivation or excessive stimulation
sleep deprivation exploitation of focus
or dot-dot-dot prolonged stress
positions precise definitions where in
mind you actually not that important
because the ethics code already directs
us to behave ethically and to not abuse
people and whether or not something in
somebody's book is cruel or an inhumane
treatment or whether it is torture or
whatever else the problem is that
things are being done deliberately and
that the APA came out and saying I we
don't think this has happened and you
have names why don't you cite any
evidence and this went on forever until
the evidence became for everybody's so
overwhelming that now the conversation
is no longer about whether it actually
happened or not but what the next step
is so while I on the one hand you know
who would help in the effort of defining
torture methods that are being used
currently and to say very specifically
that's what you're not allowed to do as
a psychologist I would also say that any
of the paradigms that could be invented
are easily understood and the question
is whether the profession is willing to
be an instrument in in the execution of
these methods and how our professional
organization takes a stand I guess I
have a couple of thoughts one about the
ethics code the part of the ethics code
I guess 1.02 I can't remember where
under which section that I found that I
still can't get my brain wrapped around
and that makes no sense it's the part of
our APA ethics code that says that when
you observe when a psychologist observes
human rights violations it is that it is
his or her duty to intervene to try and
stop it to call the attention and but
then there's this odd little thing that
seems to erase it the whole rest of the
ethics code which says however if this
is a legal authority that isn't you know
or a military authority or whatever a
legitimate authority that is instructing
you to go ahead and do these things a
psychologist may follow orders
ie you know for someone who grew up in
you know in the world following the
Nuremberg trials and here he'll heard
from childhood on that following orders
is not an OK excuse for you know violate
huge violations of human rights the idea
that you would have that though but this
is still in our ethics code so all of
these things anything can be is fair
game if you're following orders so even
though the number one thing in the APA
ethics code is do no harm you can
actually violate do no harm if you are
following orders and that this is not
like grand news to dr. banking people
you know I wrote about it people have
written about it people have argued it
and it's it's sort of like you know it
oh very interesting and you know it's
nothing nothing changes in the APA
ethics code this whole question about
the contradiction between the the
requirement that psychologists do no
harm and yet the the sanction that they
or can the direction that they can
follow orders and this produces a
contradiction indeed it does
I like to think of that there are two
great profession two classic professions
basically the biomechanical and the
legal that have been incorporated in the
US military and this creates an internal
and unresolvable ethical contradiction
between the obligations to your
profession and your clients or patients
and your your subordination to the chain
of command
alright what this means for lawyers are
not to cite two of them today and I know
others grow miss including a very close
personal friend of mine that every
lawyer who's a giant faces on a daily
basis the tension between these two
masters ethical responsibilities they
don't they take to defend their clients
and the earth they take as officers in
the chain of command and we've seen two
examples Lieutenant Commander Swift who
represented them was one of the most
high-profile of the guys he's been
denied promotion he being kicked out of
military's careers over
okay and just this week I think on
Monday The Sydney Morning Herald
reported that a major michael dan lorry
Michael Dante more of the US Marine
Corps who defends the man who was going
to be the first person brought before
the military commissions in the MIS no
ha David Hicks an Australian detainee
who's been subjected to the most
strenuous regime
Mauri Mauri has been recommended for
prosecution by the chief prosecutor
warrant anima while saying that his
rigorous defense of kicks has been a
violation of his obligation to his
commanders so again Maury Morris careers
over
but then he's out okay so he's a minute
these are these are officers and there
are many officers like this who face of
this contradiction come down on the side
of observing their ethical obligations
and so I think that the I don't know but
I can't be sure but I think
psychologists more time psychologists in
the same position there is this constant
tension the military will press them to
obey and the professional association
has to a prayer press them to obey
ethical standards okay and then the
officers themselves but this association
cannot back away it must make it ethical
requirements as clear as the military
makes its requirement and insist upon
them just as strenuously and leave it to
the individual officers to work out the
contradictions and hopefully in the
future psychologists and I no doubt I
don't I don't doubt that there are
something we haven't heard about the
psychologists will do as Lieutenant
Commander Swift my mental more II have
done them countless other Jags have done
is that they will mind their ethical
obligations and they will pay the
enormous and high personal price that
these officers are going to pay I would
like to bring up the issue of the
Patriot Act
which i think is an extension of what
we talked about in that I think our
professional organizations need to take
the stand and section 215 of the Patriot
Act which violates our confidential
records which could very well relate to
these issues because if we are we have
any clients who are torture victims
whatever our records could be subpoenaed
just again on professional
responsibilities and this is well known
but we may have forgotten that when the
Patriot Act was first drafted who rose
up professionally a group that and I'd
say that we all suffer from anti
librarian prejudice okay I was really
surprised and I think we were all
impressed with the American Library
Association rose up and fought this and
fought this hard unrestrained you know
why because this goes to the core of
their professional practice there was a
group within this CPA that I was
involved with was muffled honor that
worked with the APA legal office to try
to close the loophole and the Patriot
Act that does appear on paper to permit
secrets of peanuts of our second therapy
records but our APA office and the legal
office lien practice director believes
actually that's illegal under federal
law and but they need test cases so if
anyone gets one of these so-called
National Security Letters for a
psychotherapy records form and contact
Billy in a fill at the APA practice
directory legal office geez the head of
the office they want these cases they
want to help take me the courts are to
the establish the bulk of interrogation
is done by military intelligence most of
the work that was done in Abu Ghraib and
Guantanamo was done by both intelligence
not the CIA Jayne man's best article in
this series actually refers to the sere
technique and it talks about and this
may not be very politically correct but
it talks about how the soldiers in
receiving their training in Fort Bragg
actually received a form of you know
indoctrination into techniques of
torture which they then and this you
know perhaps is not quite exactly the
same as what a professional Corey is
talking about perhaps closer to what
you're saying is it oftentimes the
soldiers themselves not under
or this from John Rumsfeld or Sanchez or
whatever not even knowing at them 34 52
which is the manual that describes how
your interrogation actually from a
psychological point of view impose
things that they won't talk nothing in
discussing this I think it's very
important to go beyond simply what the
psychologists are doing that the whole
process of psychology and understand
those techniques and I wonder if I have
you could respond to the whole
discussion that may have started in
talking about CI techniques on the seer
techniques this is one of those things I
read the jane mayer article and i think
this is one of those shadowy realms
above which we don't know very much my
own sense has been that this paradigm
invite as a very complex multifaceted
journey and it is once that as Geoffrey
K has suggested once those records are
open and we can actually study it to in
turn to be far more complex and even
that fragmentary initial sketch I've
offered in my book one of the ways it
might have happened but I'm not sure is
I think that the seer techniques
actually reversed the psychological
paradigm in other words that once the
see I developed this method for
interrogating others the US military
military intelligence through their
contact and ongoing relations at the CIA
learned it kind of flipped in so we
wanted to train our soldiers so it
couldn't be done to them our soldiers
haven't learned it flipped it back and
applied it to others but it's the same
kind of paradigm and there I think this
paradigm has a very complex journey
whose history we're only beginning to
appreciate one of the interesting things
about that Oracle is that the Dean of
Students at the US Military Academy
Museum is general Parker Finnegan went
to Hollywood to meet with the producer
of 24 and is a stomping stop showing
this stop showing this idea that torture
is effective because in the field right
now
our soldiers are watching your show and
they are doing this this is not some
ratbag academic like myself this is a
general serving general in the u.s. army
whose task it is to form the next
generation of
America's men and women who wear our
uniform and represent our nation abroad
and he is deeply concerned by the
propagation of these ideas and I take
that as one more vote for the idea that
it's incumbent upon responsible
Americans like the general elect the
American Psychological Association to
collectively impose our wisdom upon our
political leaders who don't know any
better
although the capacity for fiction like
24 is infinite and it's totally fix your
own book that's another subject not
written about that elsewhere but but I
would argue actually that there is a
limiting restraint the human mind is the
human mind and although our
understanding of it increases constantly
that eventuate a certain point they're
gonna reach the limits over here what
techniques can be used and I think I
would argue that I would think that
we're probably after 2,000 years of
Western judicial torture and 50 years of
American and allied psychological
torture we may be reaching those limits
so that although the American
Psychiatric Association may have to add
another point of two and years to come I
would argue they've basically got it
right we've gotten the three parts right
we've gotten sensory disorientation to
the universe and I agree absolutely in
fact it's not infinite and we can do
something about I myself feel that there
are many aspects of the written policies
of Penance documented council resolution
that are quite we can be quite proud of
but but I agree with many of the
comments as you know Steve that there's
been something very lacking in that
faro efficient its leadership in really
getting out there making some noise to
just make it very clear where we stand
and what we won't stand for even in the
debating the fact that we know that
psychologists were involved in training
and in helping think about
interrogations to me the response should
be visceral and not we shouldn't even
have to be pressuring our organization
to get it together our organization
should be leading us marching around the
Pentagon
okay so severe mental pain define it so
that future judge by bees is now a
federal judge in this circuit by the way
but featured judge by bees cannot come
around and come up with these
definitions so so I'm sure that they
were effective have been repudiated by
the Defense Department the Bush
administration okay so
so among the definitional work of your
Association as professionals to get some
of these definitions of you from the
point of view of your professional
practice people like dr. Jacobs here and
and the practitioners in the 30 to 40
our portrait victim treatment centers
across America with their case files not
probably in excessive tens of thousands
there was ample evidence to define what
constitutes severe severe mental pain to
put these you know in the DSM form which
has legal standing okay so therefore
this does not allow an absurd trifling
of the definitions okay so that's
something I urge you to put on your
professional agenda is getting some of
these key issues torture psychological
torture severe mental pain get them in
the dsm form so they are enshrined in
the legal standing that them that the
final rounds my third point is that i
put some flyers in the back a bunch of
us whose gut reaction was oh my god i
cant painten's to my organism this is my
organization yeah so some of us have
withheld our dues for 2007 I'm urging
anyone who is interested in doing so too
and write a letter and explain to I
guess the thing Norman Anderson who's
the executive director the guy is on the
sheet when you get your renewal you know
I just wrote it back to him and just
explain why you are with hope why you
plan to withhold your dues for 2008
until and unless APA gets its act
together because I guess I don't know
how you feel I do not want my
grandchildren looking up and saying you
belong to this organization while they
were condoning torturing must be nuts
and one of the student was asked can you
define what the real ethical definition
of ethics I think that was the question
and the student got into that very
complicated abstract definition of
ethics and this somebody from the
speaker said you know doing the right
thing that is the effect it's so simple
doing the right thing